Course Contents:
Module No.
Topics
Hours
 
01
Module 1: Introduction

Meaning and Concept of Crime, Elements of Crime, Stages of Crime.

 
08Hrs.
 
 
02
Module 2: Punishments

Introduction to Punishments, Commutation of Sentence and Fractions of Terms of Punishment, Solitary Confinement and its Limits, Enhanced Punishment for Certain Offences after Previous Conviction.

 
06Hrs.
 
 
03
Module 3: General Exceptions and Right of Private Defence

General Exceptions: Act done by a person bound by law, Mistake of Fact, Judicial Acts, Justified Acts, and Accidents, Understanding the Right of Private Defence, Right of Private Defence of Body and Property, Limits and Commencement of Right of Private Defence, Right of Private Defence Against Assault and Deadly Assault, Right of Private Defence Against Kidnapping and Abduction.

 
10Hrs.
 
 
 
04
Module 4: Preliminary Crimes

Abetment: Definitions and Punishments, Abetment in Different Scenarios, Criminal Conspiracy: Meaning and Elements, Attempted Offences: Definitions and Punishments, Legal Ramifications of Abetment, Conspiracy, and Attempt.

 
06 Hrs.
 
 
 
 
05
Module 5: Offences Against Women and Children

Understanding Sexual Offences, Laws against Sexual Assault, Harassment, and Rape, Offences Relating to Marriage and Dowry, Offences Affecting Pregnancy and Childbirth, Protection of Children: Laws against Kidnapping, Abduction, and Trafficking

 
08Hrs.
 
 
 
 
 
06
Module 6: Offences Affecting the Human Body

Understanding Culpable Homicide and Murder, Punishments for Culpable Homicide and Murder, Offences Related to Hurt and Grievous Hurt, Criminal Force and Assault: Definitions and Punishments, Laws against Kidnapping, Abduction, and Forced Labour.

 
08Hrs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
07
 
 
Module 7: Offences Against the State

Offences Endangering Sovereignty and Unity, Laws against Waging War and Terrorism, Acts Against Public Servants and the Government, Offences Relating to Elections and Electoral Malpractices.

 
04Hrs.
 
 
 
 
08
 
 
. Module 8: Offences Relating to Property and Documents, against Public Health and Safety

Theft, Robbery, and Extortion: Definitions and Punishments, Offences of Criminal Misappropriation and Breach of Trust, Forgery, Counterfeiting, and Tampering with Property Marks, Criminal Trespass and House-breaking: Laws and Punishments, Public Nuisance and its Consequences, Laws against Spreading Infections and Adulteration, Offences Relating to Transportation and Public Safety, Laws against Environmental Damage and Negligence.

 
06Hrs.
 
 
09
Module 9: Offences Relating to Religion and Morality

Offences Against Religious Sentiments and Places of Worship, Acts of Disturbance and Provocation, Laws against Obscenity, Lottery, and Public Decency.

 
 
02Hrs
 
10
Module 10: Defamation, Criminal Intimidation, Insult, and annoyance

Meaning of Defamation, Exceptions to Defamation, Punishment for Defamation, Criminal Intimidation, Public Mischief, Insult and Annoyance
